feat: offboarding operator (#248)
moondance-labs/tanssi-docs: node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process.md

---
title: Offboarding Process
description: Detailed guide on how to properly offboard your validator node from the Tanssi network
icon: octicons-arrow-down-right-24
template: main.html
---

# Offboarding Process

> This guide provides detailed instructions for each step of the validator offboarding process. Follow these steps carefully to ensure a smooth transition.

Reviewer: Elaborate, explain what is this about, why there existes an offboarding process, why it's important to do it properly, and what is to be expected by the reader

## Opt-out from the Tanssi Network

The first step in the offboarding process is to opt out of the Tanssi network. This will enable Tanssi to verify your intent to leave the protocol and validate your identity.
You can do this through several methods:

### Using the Symbiotic CLI {: #opt-out-network-with-cli }

If you have the [Symbiotic CLI](../../onboarding/opt-in-to-tanssi/#set-up-the-cli) installed and want to sign with a Ledger device:

=== "MainNet"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network INSERT_NETWORK_ADDRESS --ledger --ledger-account INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --ledger --ledger-account INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS --chain sepolia
    ```

> For signing with a private key (not recommended):

Reviewer: Same comment applies to the vault section

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --private-key INSERT_PRIVATE_KEY --chain sepolia
    ```

### Using Etherscan {: #opt-out-network-with-etherscan }

You can interact directly with the smart contract through Etherscan using a browser wallet like MetaMask:

=== "MainNet"

    [Contract address: {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.registry_network }}](https://etherscan.io/address/{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.registry_network }}#writeContract){target=\_blank}

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    [Contract address: {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.registry_network }}](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.registry_network }}#writeContract){target=\_blank}

Make sure to select **`Contract`** and **`Write Contract`** then click on Connect to Web3, and select your preferred wallet (e.g. MetaMask):
![Connect to Web3 step](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-1.webp)

1. Expand the **`optout`** function
2. Insert the `TANSSI_NETWORK_ADDRESS` in the **where** field
3. Click **Write** and sign the transaction

> ![Opt out operator](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-2.webp)

Reviewer: Make sure to take screenshots with a 150% zoom in the browser (The images should look like in the onboarding section)

Author: I was checking the screenshot, and they are already at 150% zoom with the same browser, etc.
What is the specific difference that you notice?

Reviewer: Comparison between two screenshots, one from onboarding with 150% and the other from this doc.

<img width="1037" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f283a733-6a9a-4b40-b4ce-aa3543fbc078" />

Author: screenshots updated

### Using Safe for Multisig Setups {: #opt-out-network-with-safe }

> For [Safe](https://app.safe.global/){target=\_blank} accounts, use the Transaction Builder with these addresses:

Reviewer: And what else should they do? (Specify which transaction they need to select and sign)

Reviewer: Same comment applies to the vault section

=== "MainNet"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.registry_network }}

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.registry_network }}

> ### Verify Opt-out Status {: #verify-opt-out-status }

Reviewer: No dashes in opt-out. Check all the ocurrences

3. Select the **`isOptedIn`** function
4. Paste your operator's account in the **who** field
5. Insert the `TANSSI_NETWORK_ADDRESS` in the **where** field (`{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }}` on Sepolia TestNet)
6. Click on **Query**

You'll get a `false` result if your operator has successfully opted out and `true` if they are still opted in.

![Check the registration status](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-3.webp)

#### Using the Symbiotic CLI

You can also verify your opt-out status using the Symbiotic CLI:

=== "MainNet"
    
    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.tanssi_network }}
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --chain sepolia
    ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out and `true` if you are still opted in.

## Contact Tanssi Team

After opting out from the network, notify the Tanssi team of your intention to stop operating as a validator:

> 1. Complete the [validator offboarding form](INSERT_FORM_URL){target=_blank} with the following information:

Reviewer: If we don't have the form, convert the PR to draft, and add the blocking reason to the task

    - Your account address
    - Opt-out transaction hash (for verification)
    - Preferred timeline for offboarding
    - Reason for offboarding (optional)

2. Wait for confirmation from the Tanssi team acknowledging your request

## Middleware Removal

> Once your request is received and processed, the Tanssi team will schedule the removal of your operator from the middleware. The removal process follows a specific timeline: the operator is paused at epoch n and then unregistered at epoch n+1. This process typically takes two epochs to complete. You will receive a notification when it is complete. This step requires no action, but you must wait for confirmation before proceeding to the next steps.

Reviewer: What's an epoch? Also, backticks to n and n + 1

Reviewer: How are the operators being notified?

## Pause Operations

> After receiving confirmation of middleware removal, you can safely decommission your validator node. If you haven't yet received confirmation that your operator has been removed from the middleware, wait for one complete epoch to ensure all operations are correctly settled. You can check the current epoch status through the Tanssi dashboard. Do not proceed to the next steps until you've received confirmation of middleware removal or an entire epoch has passed.

Reviewer: What's the tanssi dashboard? where Can I see it?

Author: There is not something available right now, I thought it was, removing that part.

---
title: Offboarding Process
description: Detailed guide on how to properly offboard your validator node from the Tanssi network
icon: octicons-arrow-down-right-24
template: main.html
---

> # Offboarding Process

Reviewer: Offboarding process for what? change it for something like: "Offboarding an Operator from the Tanssi Protocol"

> 

Reviewer: Add the introduction title(like in every other article)

This guide provides detailed instructions for each step of the validator offboarding process. Follow these steps carefully to ensure a smooth transition.

## Prerequisites

Before starting the offboarding process, ensure you have the following:

> - Access to the wallet that controls your validator operator account

Reviewer: Refer explicitly between substrate and eth accounts. Which type is this one?

> - Your validator operator address and network address

Reviewer: Same as before, if eth, make it explicit. What is the network address? isn't it something that we should provide?

- Sufficient ETH in your wallet to cover gas fees for transactions

### Interaction Methods

> To follow this guide, you must interact with smart contracts. There are several ways to interact with the smart contracts:

Reviewer: This is the same text being used in the onb oarding section. Make it a snippet to deduplicate

### Using the Symbiotic CLI {: #opt-out-network-with-cli }

The Symbiotic CLI provides a straightforward way to opt out from the network. Choose the appropriate command based on your network and signing method:

#### Using a Ledger Device

=== "MainNet"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network INSERT_NETWORK_ADDRESS --ledger --ledger-account INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --ledger --ledger-account INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS --chain sepolia
    ```

For signing with a private key:

=== "MainNet"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network INSERT_NETWORK_ADDRESS --private-key INSERT_PRIVATE_KEY
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py opt-out-network {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --private-key INSERT_PRIVATE_KEY --chain sepolia
    ```

> !!! warning

Reviewer: Make this a snippet to deduplicate

Author: This is not the same, the command is different, maybe theres is a way to use an snippet and add a variable?

Author: This specific deduplication task we can leave for a refactor later

Author: I created an issue for this

1. Expand the **`optOut`** function
2. Insert the `TANSSI_NETWORK_ADDRESS` in the **where** field (e.g, `{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }}` on Sepolia TestNet)
3. Click **Write** and sign the transaction

![Opt out operator](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-2.webp)

### Using Safe for Multisig Setups {: #opt-out-network-with-safe }

For [Safe](https://app.safe.global/){target=\_blank} accounts, use the Transaction Builder with these addresses:

=== "MainNet"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.network_registry }}

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.network_registry }}

Finally, pick the optOut function, insert the `TANSSI_NETWORK_ADDRESS` to which your node is currently registered (e.g, `{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }}` on Sepolia TestNet), and sign the transaction.

### Verify Opt out Status {: #verify-opt-out-status }

After submitting the opt out transaction, you can verify your opt out status using one of these methods:

> #### Using Etherscan

Reviewer: All this verification content seems to be identical to the one in the onboarding section. The function is the same.
Make it a text snippet to reuse

Author: Also the use of variables in the snippets is not working as it is implemented it requires to create a particular setup for this to work

![Check the registration status](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-3.webp)

#### Using the Symbiotic CLI

You can also verify your opt out status using the Symbiotic CLI:

=== "MainNet"
    
    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.tanssi_network }}
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --chain sepolia
    ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out and `true` if you are still opted in.

## Contact Tanssi Team

After opting out from the network, notify the Tanssi team of your intention to stop operating as a validator:

1. Complete the [validator offboarding form](INSERT_FORM_URL){target=_blank} with the following information:
    - Your account address
    - Opt out transaction hash (for verification)
    - Preferred timeline for offboarding
    - Reason for offboarding (optional)

2. Wait for confirmation from the Tanssi team acknowledging your request

> ## Middleware Removal

Reviewer: This is not an operator's step. Merge it with the "contact the tanssi team" making it one action

> Once your request is received and processed, the Tanssi team will schedule the removal of your operator from the middleware. This process typically takes two epochs to complete. You will receive a notification when it is complete. This step requires no action, but you must wait for confirmation before proceeding to the next steps.

Reviewer: ** two epochs after someone removes the entry from the middleware

Author: I'm not totally sure about that, I think that is one epoch after someone removes the entry from the middleware. All the process might take two epochs. Do you think is needed more clarification in that aspect?

Reviewer: What needs to be clear is that this step is semi-automated, and that it needs someone to fo something. After that something, some more time is needed (2 epochs max)

![Connect to Web3 step](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-4.webp)

1. Expand the **`optOut`** function
2. Insert the `VAULT_ADDRESS` in the **where** field (e.g, `{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault }}` on Sepolia TestNet)
3. Click **Write** and sign the transaction

![Opt out operator](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-5.webp)

### Using Safe {: #opt-out-vault-with-safe }

For Safe accounts, use these contract addresses in the Transaction Builder:

=== "MainNet"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.vault_registry }}

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault_registry }}

Finally, pick the optOut function, insert the `VAULT_ADDRESS` to which your node is currently registered (e.g, `{{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault }}` on Sepolia TestNet), and sign the transaction.

### Verify Vault Opt out Status {: #verify-vault-opt-out-status }

After submitting the vault opt-out transaction, you can verify your opt-out status using one of these methods:

> #### Using Etherscan

Reviewer: If  this is the same content as in the onboarding, make it a text snippet and reuse

On the contract's page:

1. Click on the **Read Contract** tab
2. Ensure your wallet is connected; if not, connect it again
3. Select the **`isOptedIn`** function
4. Paste your operator's account in the **who** field
5. Insert the vault address in the **where** field
6. Click on **Query**

You'll get a `false` result if your operator has successfully opted out of the vault and `true` if they are still opted in.

![Check the registration status](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-6.webp)

#### Using the Symbiotic CLI

You can also verify your vault opt-out status using the Symbiotic CLI:

=== "MainNet"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS INSERT_VAULT_ADDRESS
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault }} --chain sepolia
    ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out of the vault and `true` if you are still opted in.

> 

Reviewer: Leavinh Symbiotic's oerator registry step is missing. We have it listed in the onboarding docs, and it should be listed -as optional- here as well

Author: Is not technically possible to leave the symbiotic register the contract as no method for it

---
title: Offboarding Process
description: Detailed guide on how to properly offboard your validator node from the Tanssi network
icon: octicons-arrow-down-right-24
template: main.html
---

# Offboarding an Operator from the Tanssi Protocol

## Introduction {: #introduction }

This guide provides detailed instructions for each step of the validator offboarding process. It is intended for node operators who wish to cease their participation in the Tanssi protocol in a safe, verifiable, and coordinated manner.
Validator offboarding is a formal process designed to maintain the network's integrity, security, and stability. Since validators are critical in consensus and protocol operations, their entry and exit must follow a transparent and auditable flow. Simply shutting down a node without notice can lead to unintended consequences as slashing.
By following this guide, you will:

- Properly signal your intent to leave the protocol
- Ensure your operator is cleanly removed from Tanssi's middleware

> - Prevent unnecessary resource usage and avoid missed communication

Author: If you are registered as operator in the middleware and you node if off. You cloud be selected ad operator and fail to  do so, because the node is off, this might lead to slashing.
But I'll rephrase it.

![Check the registration status](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-3.webp)

#### Using the Symbiotic CLI

You can also verify your opt out status using the Symbiotic CLI:

=== "MainNet"
    
    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.mainnet.tanssi_network }}
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-network INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.tanssi_network }} --chain sepolia
    ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out and `true` if you are still opted in.

## Contact Tanssi Team

After opting out from the network, notify the Tanssi team of your intention to stop operating as a validator:

1. Complete the [validator offboarding form](https://www.tanssi.network/ecosystem/operator-offboarding){target=_blank} with the following information:
    - Your account address
    - Opt out transaction hash (for verification)
    - Preferred timeline for offboarding
    - Reason for offboarding (optional)

> 2. Wait for confirmation from the Tanssi team acknowledging your request

Reviewer: Confirmation of request completion, not acknowledgment.

> Once your request is received, the Tanssi team will manually schedule the removal of your operator from the middleware. This step is semi-automated and requires manual action from the Tanssi team before the process can continue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon receiving your request, your operator's removal will be scheduled. This step is semi-automated and may take up to one week to complete.
```

> After the removal is initiated, the process may take up to two additional epochs to fully complete. You will receive a notification when the removal is finalized. Until then, no further action is needed, but you must wait for the confirmation before proceeding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the removal is executed, the process takes two additional epochs to complete fully. You will receive a notification once it is safe to continue with the next steps of the offboarding process.
```

> You will be notified by email when it is safe to decommission the node. Please do not decommission your node until you receive this notification.

Reviewer: Repetitive. Remove this line.

> !!! info "What is an Epoch?"

Reviewer: This belongs to the learn section

    A network epoch is when a specific set of operators, determined by their captured stake, operates for the network. The middleware removal process follows a specific timeline:
    - At epoch `n`: Your operator is paused
    - At epoch `n+1`: Your operator is unregistered

    The epoch duration is designed to ensure that withdrawals don't impact the captured stake, taking into account the vault's veto and execution phases. This two-epoch process ensures a smooth transition and proper settlement of all operations.

## Pause Operations (Optional)

> After receiving the confirmation email indicating that your middleware removal is complete, you can safely decommission your validator node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the confirmation of your operator's removal, your node will stop participating in the Tanssi protocol and can now be safely decommissioned.
```

> This step is optional but recommended; leaving your node running won't provide any rewards.

Reviewer: (Remove this line)

> 1. **Stop the Validator Service**: Start by fully stopping your validator service. Ensure the service is no longer running and all related processes have been terminated. If needed, back up any important configuration files or data.

Reviewer: I wouldn't provide detailed instructions as in a numbered list. We don't know if they are running a service or a docker image, if it is a cloud server or bare metal, etc.
I would just emphasize that the services can be stopped, files backed up (if they want to) and deleted, and the whole server can be shut down

On the contract's page:

Make sure to select **`Contract`** and **`Write Contract`** then click on Connect to Web3, and select your preferred wallet (e.g. MetaMask):

1. Select the **`isOptedIn`** function
2. Paste your operator's account in the **who** field
3. Insert the vault address in the **where** field
4. Click on **Query**

You'll get a `false` result if your operator has successfully opted out of the vault and `true` if they are still opted in.

![Check the registration status](/images/node-operators/validators/offboarding/offboarding-process/offboarding-process-6.webp)

#### Using the Symbiotic CLI

You can also verify your vault opt-out status using the Symbiotic CLI:

=== "MainNet"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS INSERT_VAULT_ADDRESS
    ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

    ```bash
    python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault }} --chain sepolia
    ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out of the vault and `true` if you are still opted in.

## Next Steps

After completing the offboarding process:

> - Consider providing feedback about your experience to help improve the Tanssi network

Reviewer: How?

---
title: Offboarding Process
description: Detailed guide on how to properly offboard your operator node from the Tanssi network
icon: octicons-arrow-down-right-24
template: main.html
---

# Offboarding an Operator from Tanssi

## Introduction {: #introduction }

Operator offboarding is the formal process by which node operators safely and transparently exit the Tanssi protocol. It ensures network integrity, security, and stability by providing clear steps for operators who wish to cease participation.

Operators play a critical role in consensus and network operations. Abruptly shutting down a node without following the proper procedures can negatively operators, potentially resulting in slashing.

By reading this guide, you will learn how to:

- Signal your intent to exit the Tanssi protocol
- Safely remove your operator from Tanssi's middleware
- Prevent resource waste during the offboarding period

This document covers all necessary steps, including opting out of the network, notifying the Tanssi team, and optionally decommissioning your node and exiting associated vaults.

> Please carefully review each section relevant to your setup. If you have questions during offboarding, the Tanssi team can support you on [Discord](https://discord.gg/Jm2KH8xT7J).

Reviewer: Link shows an "Invitation invalid" error

1. Complete the [validator offboarding form](https://www.tanssi.network/ecosystem/operator-offboarding){target=_blank} with the following information:
    - Your account address
    - Opt out transaction hash (for verification)
    - Preferred timeline for offboarding
    - Reason for offboarding (optional)

2. Wait for confirmation from the Tanssi team acknowledging your request

Once your request is received, the Tanssi team will manually schedule the removal of your operator from the middleware. This step is semi-automated and requires manual action from the Tanssi team before the process can continue.

After the removal is initiated, the process may take up to two additional epochs to fully complete. You will receive a notification when the removal is finalized. Until then, no further action is needed, but you must wait for the confirmation before proceeding.

You will be notified by email when it is safe to decommission the node. Please do not decommission your node until you receive this notification.

> !!! info "What is an Epoch?"

Reviewer: Do we have this info in the learn section? If so, we can add a link. Otherwise, let's create a tocket so wwe can add it later

> Once you receive confirmation of your operator's removal you can safely stop any running services related to your operator at this stage. Ensure the operator processes have fully stopped depending on your setup (cloud infrastructure, Docker containers, bare metal, etc.). If needed, back up important configuration files, logs, or any relevant data before deleting them. Afterward, you may repurpose, terminate, or shut down your infrastructure entirely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you receive confirmation of your operator's removal, you can safely stop any running services related to your operator. If needed, back up important configuration files, logs, or any relevant data before deleting them. Afterward, you may repurpose, terminate, or shut down your infrastructure entirely.
```

=== "MainNet"

 ```bash
 python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS INSERT_VAULT_ADDRESS
 ```

=== "TestNet (Sepolia)"

 ```bash
 python3 symb.py check-opt-in-vault INSERT_OPERATOR_ADDRESS {{ networks.symbiotic.contracts.sepolia.vault }} --chain sepolia
 ```

The output will show `false` if you have successfully opted out of the vault and `true` if you are still opted in.

## Next Steps

After completing the offboarding process:

> - Consider providing feedback in the offboarding [form](https://www.tanssi.network/ecosystem/operator-offboarding){target=_blank} about your experience to help improve the Tanssi network

Reviewer: At this point, the offboarding form has already been filled out, so it can't be a "next step".
Add a note in the contact tanssi team stating the importance of providing feedback, and remove the step from this section.
With just one item in the list, make it a single paragraph like "After completing the offboarding process, if you plan to return...."
